1 – IntroductionNational General Elections (NGE) were held in Solomon Islands on 3 April 2019. These were the 10th general elections held since Independence in 1978, and the first since the final departure in mid-2017 of the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI).  The elections were held following the passage by the Solomon Islands National Parliament in 2018 of a new Electoral Act.  The new Act (and associated regulations) provided for changed procedures around the registration of voters and the counting of votes, and the imposition of a 24-hour campaign blackout immediately prior to election day.  The reform of the system of vote counting was a significant change: previously counting was undertaken ballot box by ballot box; the new system mixed votes from different ballot boxes before counting.  The new Act also outlined a range of increased penalties for electoral offenses.The final list of registered voters for the 2019 NGE numbered some 359,521.  This represented a 25 percent increase on the 2014 figure of 287,567.  [check figures] Only two constituencies showed a lower number of registered voters in 2019 compared with 2014 (Small Malaita and South New Georgia Rendova).  Among the remaining 48 constituences, there was a very wide range of increase in registrations, from a 3 percent increase in Lau Mbaelelea to an 83 percent increase in West Honiara and 82 percent increase in Baegu/Asifola. (See Annex X for a full list.) The scope of this reportThis report presents the initial findings from a large-scale election observation exercise conducted by the Department of Pacific Affairs of the Australian National University from 23 March to 10 April 2019.  The work was carried out by a team of 90 observers, of which 77 were Solomon Islanders, in 15 of Solomon Islands’ 50 national constituencies. All observers were duly accredited by the Solomon Islands Electoral Office.  The observation exercise included both direct observation of the conduct of the NGE (campaigning, polling and counting), and citizen surveys undertaken both before and after polling day.  (Chapter 2, below, canvasses the methodology of the election observation exercise in detail.)The purpose of conducting citizen surveys in addition to observing the mechanics of the elections themselves was to deepen our understanding of the experience and expectations of Solomon Islanders regarding the electoral process, understood in its broadest sense, and thereby to put the elections into a broader social and political context.  In all, 2,450 citizen surveys were carried out in the ten days leading up to election day, and 2,418 surveys were carried out in the week after election day.  This may well have been the most comprehensive survey exercise of its type undertaken in Solomon Islands’ history.It is not possible, in this initial report - and so soon after the election monitoring exercise itself - to provide a comprehensive description and analysis of the rich dataset that the citizen surveys have yielded up. This document therefore reports on the observations of ANU observers regarding the mechanics of the electoral process, with a selection of findings drawn from the survey data to embed these observations in a broader context.  The intention is that this report will provide a helpful contribution to the Solomon Islands Electoral Office’s own analysis and understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of electoral administration in the 2019 NGE.A more comprehensive report will be issued later in 2019, drawing on the full set of data in both the ANU team’s observations and citizen surveys.  This will be of interest to a wider audience.Structure of observation researchObservation research (as distinct from the citizen surveys) was structured along the following lines:• Pre-polling period observationso Securityo Voter educationo Campaign strategies and rallieso Money politicso Gendero ‘Devil’s night’o Handling of ballot papers, boxes and materials• Polling Day observationso The opening of pollingo Voter identificationo Method of votingo Electoral offenseso Close of pollingo Security• Post-polling observationso Transportation of ballot boxes and paperso Performance of key personnelo Inclusiono The role of mobile phones and the interneto Security• Counting observationso Generalo DisputesThe Pre-poll citizen surveys were structured to explore issues relating to citizens’:• Knowledge about the election and experience of electoral awareness campaigns • Experience with registration• Perceptions of the secrecy of voting and the integrity of the process• Experience (if any) with gifting/treating• Perceptions about the state of development, and of government services, compared to 2014• Perceptions about the role played by constituency development funds (CDFs) in voter behaviour.Post-polling citizen surveys explored citizens’:• Experience on election day itself• Views on factors influencing voter behaviour and choice• Experience (if any) with gifting/treating• Experience (if any) with electoral fraud• Perceptions about the role of CDFsMain findingsOverall, ANU’s observation of the management of the election was that:[discuss][Broader points as well]
2 – MethodsThe purpose of the ANU election observation mission was to produce a comprehensive data set on national elections and political participation in Solomon Islands. A rigorous research approach was adopted in order to produce primarily quantitative results that may inform an impartial assessment of the 2019 Nation General Election. The intention is that the research findings generated could   strengthen the Solomon Islands Electoral Commission’s capacity to manage elections in the future, such as in areas of voter registration, roll administrationand electoral management. In addition, the election observation has produced data that could be utilised for country situational and political economy analysis. The findings provide insights into civic awareness, political participation, including the participation of women in elections, money politics, changing political culture and local level development issues.2.1 ANU approach to election observation The research approach undertaken by the ANU, through the Department of Pacific Affairs (DPA), to election observation is deliberately different from those typically adopted by international election observation missions. These observations tend to be limited to the immediate pre-polling and polling periods, are narrow in their geographic scope, and are designed to provide a formal assessment of the integrity of the election. They are often published in the immediate aftermath of an election as a formal assessment of electoral credibility.  By contrast, DPA’s approach is not designed to provide a formal assessment or offer explicit judgement on the credibility of the elections.  Instead, the observation exercise is principally aimed at supporting long term research on elections in Solomon Islands and supporting policy development regarding election management in the broader Pacific region.The 2019 Solomon Islands Election Observation Mission was the second of its kind led by the DPA in Solomon Islands and the sixth of its kind in the Pacific region. DPA’s observations conducted for the 2014 National General Elections in Solomon Islands comprised of a large-scale observation across 12 constituencies. By contrast, the 2019 election observation mission was an even more comprehensive study of national elections and political participation in Solomon Islands and covered 15 constituencies. The election observation was conducted in six of Solomon Islands’ nine provinces - Western, Isabel, Central, Malaita, Guadalcanal and Makira -as well as in the national capital, Honiara. Figure 2.1 (on the opposite page) shows a map of the Solomon Islands with the 15 constituencies that were sampled highlighted. This means observation teams were deployed to around one in three constituencies, spread across the country to ensure that findings reflected the significant diversity found across Solomon Islands.Constituencies were sampled purposely, not randomly, in consultation with the SIEC and DFAT. Therefore, amalgamating electorates into a single analysis is not able to give statistically valid national results regardless of whether survey weighting and/or the clustering is incorporated. The selection of constituencies did, however, ensure a mix of rural and urban locations and geographical spread across the country. Other factors involved in selection included access to services, provincial location and relative disadvantage. 10 of the 12 constituencies sampled in 2014 were also reselected with the intention to produce comparative data for assessing electoral trends and the political economy factors influencing the conduct of the elections in that province.Figure 2.1: Constituencies sampled across Solomon Islands2.2 Observation research design DPA worked in collaboration with the Solomon Islands National University and a local recruitment firm to recruit 75 election observers (of which 15 were in the role of Team Leaders). The observation mission explicitly set out to build local capacity to observe, research and monitor elections by working with mainly Solomon Islander researchers. Observers were split into 15 teams and assigned one constituency per team. These comprised of five Solomon Islands observers, including one experienced researcher acting as team leader. Each team was also supported by one researcher from ANU Prior to deployment to constituencies, all observers took part in an extensive training and accreditation program so that they fully understood their roles as observers and the broader data collection process. There were two types of participants involved in this electoral observation research. The first, were voters in the national general election who were asked to respond to the citizen surveys administered by DPA observers. The second,  were the observer team members themselves. They  formed and recorded their own judgements about events taking place before, on and after election day. Citizen surveys:Observers were required to carry out two short citizen surveys, one during the campaign period and the other in the post-polling period. The data taken from these surveys informs  most of the quantitative analysis of voter experiences which is reported on and discussed here.Each observer team was asked to interview a total of 16 adult citizens at selected polling station locations in the fortnight prior to polling and another 16 citizens in the week after polling was completed. Each survey comprised of 40 – 50 principally single response, short answer questions. These questions sought to assess key aspects of electoral administration, including voter registration and awareness, and voters’ experiences on polling day. Participation by voters in the citizen surveys was entirely voluntary and data was collected in a  confidential and anonymous manner. The citizen survey data has been disaggregated by sex, age and constituency. The research approach aimed to produce representative data at the constituency level. Total samples of citizen surveys completed are different across constituencies based on the number of polling stations sampled. For urban constituencies, 12 polling station locations were sampled. In semi rural constituencies, which were generally typical of Solomon Islands, 10 polling station locations were sampled. For rural constituencies, eight polling station locations were selected. All observer teams travelled to  their sampled polling stations during pre-polling observations to conduct citizen surveys. They returned to these same locations for polling day observations (as far as possible) and conducted post-polling surveys at these same locations. Table 2.1 provides an overview of the citizen survey data collected across constituencies.  ConstituencyNo. of Polling Stations/ Research Sites VisitedNo. of citizens surveyed (age, gender and total)Registered votersPercentage of population surveyed   18-2930-5960+WomenMenTotal  Urban Central Guadalcanal121322104220118338481504.7%Central Honiara1213822224193191384159862.4%East Honiara1213818465197190387154452.5%West Honiara1215320627193193386104773.7%Semi-RuralCentral Makira10822063015116731862995.0%Gizo Kolombangara109721515163164327105273.1%Maringe Kokota10951329516815432258935.5%North Vella Lavella10791875515916232146067.0%Russel Savo10921864316116032170984.5%RuralAoke Langalanga10951834316016132188413.6%East Guadalcanal8972194016219435666405.4%Gao Bugotu8431704012412925355434.6%Lau Mbaelelea87016338134137271109952.5%North West Choiseul8651623012812925768163.8%Small Malaita8741572812813125980533.2% Total148145028026152422244548671313693.7%Sampling within chosen constituencies has used a cluster design for which survey weighting is required. For each sampled constituency, initial statistical analyses will look at averages and one way charts, followed by averages by group and two way charts and tables. The preliminary exploratory analysis presented in this initial report does not use survey weighting, but later this will be incorporated along with appropriate recognition of clustering within electorates (polling stations, and possibly villages and households within villages), principally because these factors affect estimates of accuracy.Observation data:Election observer teams conducted extensive fieldwork to make informed judgements and assessments of the 2019 National General Elections. This included making direct personal observations at public election rallies during the campaign period, at polling stations on polling day,and in the counting rooms, as well as other general observations about preparations for the election, any disputes raised after the announcement of results and assessments of the general atmosphere in the lead up to, and after the election. These observations are subsequently recorded in a tailor-made observer journal developed by the ANU. The journal comprises both closed and open-ended questions to be answered by the observer in order to collect observational data in a systematic way.  Table 2.2 provides an overview of this data collected:Observational Data Collected (number of entries)Campaign Period73Candidate Rallies 143Pre-Polling Election Preparation76Polling Day145Post Polling73Counting34Disputes34Total 578 
2 - The Lead-up to the ElectionSurvey data collected by ANU observers suggests a fairly high level of awareness and engagement among the voting public with the voter registration process that took place in late 2018. Survey responses were also suggestive of a reasonably high level of awareness among voters about what constitutes an offense under the new Electoral Act – and this may have affected some respondents’ willingness to speak candidly with observers about the role of inducements in the campaign.  That said, only just over one in three of those surveyed had attended face-to-face voter education/awareness sessions; a much larger proportion (just under three-quarters) had encountered some form of voter awareness through (most commonly) text messages, radio or newspapers.Reflecting a high level of public commentary, the data supports a hypothesis that the level of cross-border registration was higher than might have been expected as a result of natural movement, and that Honiara has become something of a ‘vote bank’ for prospective candidates.  In this context, public confidence in the accuracy of the electoral roll was not as high as the authorities might wish.Observations by the ANU team suggest that the campaign period was essentially free of violence and tension in the 15 constituencies covered.  Data gathered on the role of inducements (in cash or kind) during the campaign period itself is suggestive but not conclusive, with citizens clearly regarding this as a sensitive topic, even in anonymous interviews. The qualitative data does suggest, however, that many voters appear to be consciously selecting their place of registration in order to maximise their chances of obtaining benefits from winning candidates.  This is something that has contributed to the high level of cross-border registrations. 1Anecdotally at least, it would seem that the imposition of a 24 hour pre-election ban on campaigning activity was successful in reducing overt last-minute campaigning and vote-buying.2.1 The registration process A large majority of citizens surveyed prior to the election (87 per cent) had checked their names at voter registration centres (Figure 2.1). This finding indicates that public awareness raising by the Solomon Islands Electoral Office on the importance of citizens checking their registration generally achieved its purpose.  Figure 2.1: Voters checked name at Voter Registration Centre (All constituencies sampled)Figure 2.2 shows some variation between constituencies in terms of voters checking that they were registered. In urban constituencies, particularly Central, West and East Honiara, voters were less likely to check their name at a Voter Registration Centre (VRC) than in the rural constituencies we sampled. In addition, our findings reveal that 11 per cent of citizens surveyed had checked their registration online (See Annex 1), although this was just as common for voters registered in rural constituencies as for voters registered in urban constituencies. This means that the large majority of voters physically went to a VRC to find out if they were registered to vote as opposed to using online resources. Even so, 11 per cent is not a negligible figure and represents a solid base on which to build future online platforms. Figure 2.2: Voters checked name at Voter Registration Centre (By constituency)The phenomenon of “cross-border registration” was prominent in public discussion in the lead up to the elections, with numerous anecdotal reports of citizens being encouraged (and facilitated) by candidates to change their registration to a new constituency in order to maximise support at the ballot box. Overall, Figure 2.3 indicates that around one in six people who were surveyed prior to the election said that someone had asked them to register in a different constituency.Figure 2.3: Citizens asked to register in another constituency (All constituencies sampled)Strikingly, in Honiara (considered as a whole) the result was double the overall figure, or around one in three of those surveyed (Figure 2.4). At the other end of the spectrum, only three per cent of citizens surveyed in Central Makira claimed to have been asked to register in a different constituency.  Figure 2.4: Citizens asked to register in another constituency (By constituency)ANU observers were of the view that many respondents were reluctant to answer this question directly, and that the true figure could well be higher than that recorded.The geographical pattern observed above was repeated when voters were asked (prior to the election) whether they had attempted to change their registration to another constituency (Figure 2.5).  Overall, the figure was 7.5 per cent of those surveyed, but in Honiara the figure was almost double this at nearly 15 per cent.  All constituencies outside Honiara were below or well below the overall figure of 7.5 per cent – except for Gizo Kolombangara where the figure was just over 14 per cent, very close to that for Honiara.Figure 2.5: Citizens who sought to change their registration to another constituency (By constituency)Those respondents who said they had tried to change their registration to another constituency were asked why they had done so.  In response, they cited a range of factors including simple convenience, a shift in place of residence/work and the influence of family.  A commonly-cited reason, however, was the hope of obtaining more benefits in future from a winning candidate.  The following (by no means exhaustive) explanations for seeking to switch constituencies, taken from respondents in a range of constituencies, convey the flavour of such responses:• “…due to no benefits from previous constituency.”• “…as a result of lack of assistance received from the politicians.”• “… never received any help from RCDF.”• “…as a result of the no assistance received from the outgoing MP in the last four years.”• “For solid two terms she didn't receive assistance on school fees from former […] MP.”• “(1) not receive anything from candidate (2) most of the time, vote for loser candidate however winning candidate always help own voters.”• “…due to unfair distribution within the constituency.”• “Because for the last 12 years I haven't received any single assistance.”• “Tired of the former honourable member, he only assisted his voters.”• “No development in my constituency so I have attempted to move to another constituency.”• “I want an honourable that supports constituents equally.”Interestingly, when citizens were surveyed on this question after the election, a higher proportion were prepared to acknowledge that they had, in fact, registered in another constituency (see Figure 2.6).  Overall, just under 12 per cent said they had changed their registration (compared to 7.5 per cent who said they’d considered this prior to the election).  In Honiara the figure was 20 per cent or one in five, compared to just under 15 per cent before the election. (In West Honiara considered by itself, the figure was 30 per cent.) Both Gizo Kolombangara and Lau Mbaelelea constituencies also showed a high level of voters who had changed their registration ahead of the election (18 and 17 per cent respectively). Figure 2.6: Citizens changed registration to another constituency (By constituency, surveyed post-election)The extent of cross-border registration appears to have varied widely from constituency to constituency, although further research would be required to identify why it was so high in particular constituencies.A certain amount of natural movement between constituencies is to be expected between elections.  Even so, taken together, these results suggest that something more than natural movement of voters was at work.  The data described above lends support, first, to the idea of Honiara as something of a ‘vote bank’ for prospective candidates. Second, though, it is a reminder that voters are not simply being moved from one constituency to another willy-nilly; rather that some voters, at least, are actively using the registration process to seek greater benefits for themselves and their families – and that they see the provision of benefits to supporters as a legitimate role for winning candidates – or simply as a fact of life.These ideas are supported (at least indirectly) by citizens’ responses to the question of whether they knew anyone who was registered in the constituency even though that person lived in another location. Figure 2.7 shows that more than one in three people answered yes to this question. Figure 2.7:  Citizens know of voters registered in their constituency but who live somewhere else (All constituencies sampled)Responses to this question for individual constituencies ranged from 15 percent for Small Malaita to well over half for Maringe Kokota (Figure 2.8).  It is notable that the three highest ‘Yes’ responses were for constituencies outside Honiara: Maringe Kokota (56 percent), North Vella Lavella (54 percent) and Gizo Kolombangara (51 percent).  Figures for the three Honiara constituencies were all close to the overall average for all constituencies sampled.Figure 2.8:  Citizens know of voters registered in their constituency but who live somewhere else (By constituency)Again, this data can be read as supporting the idea that more than a natural movement of voters took place ahead of the elections.  (Even so, ANU observers noted that a number of respondents paused or looked around them before answering this question, suggesting that the data as collected may understate the true figures.)Perhaps reflecting this situation, citizen surveys suggested that public confidence in the accuracy of the electoral roll was very mixed. Figure 2.9 shows that only 57 per cent of those surveyed said they were confident in the accuracy of the register of voters, with 29 per cent saying they were not, and 14 per cent unsure.Figure 2.9:  Accuracy of the electoral role (All constituencies sampled)In five constituencies, fewer than half of those surveyed were prepared to express confidence in the accuracy of the roll (Figure 2.10).  Confidence in the electoral roll appears weakest in urban and peri-urban areas (Honiara overall 43 per cent; Aoke Langalanga 51 per cent and Gizo Kolombangara 48 per cent).  In rural areas, confidence in the register of voters was weakest in Savo Russells (32 percent) and Small Malaita (48 per cent).Figure 2.10:  Accuracy of the electoral role (By constituency)  Even accounting for the apparent reluctance of some respondents to express themselves candidly, the data considered in this section would appear to support anecdotal evidence that the commodification of voters through seemingly organised cross-border registration drives has become a significant factor in Solomon Islands elections.  It would also appear to be damaging public confidence in the accuracy of the electoral roll – and by extension, potentially in the electoral process more broadly.At the same time, the qualitative data also shows that many voters are willing, indeed active, players in this process, ie that they are consciously using the registration process in the hope of obtaining future benefits from winning candidates in another constituency.  This helps to fill in our picture of citizens’ expectations of politics and political actors in Solomon Islands.2.2 Voter education, media/social media and security during the campaign periodVoter education/awarenessSurvey data indicates that SIEO awareness activity of any kind in the lead up to the election successfully reached just under three quarters of those who were surveyed (Figure 2.11).Figure 2.11: Have you seen ANY SIEC media or awareness? (All constituencies sampled)Figures varied from constituency to constituency, with the highest level of penetration (around 85 per cent) being recorded in urban areas (Honiara and Auki), although figures close to this were also recorded in Small Malaita, Gizo Kolombangara and North Vella Lavella.  The lowest levels of penetration were recorded in North-West Choiseul, Central Makira and East Guadalcanal (Figure 2.12).Figure 2.12: Have you seen ANY SIEC media/awareness (By constituency)  Overall, only just over one third of those surveyed had attended face-to-face voter education sessions before the elections (Figure 2.13).  As demonstrated below, this form of awareness was more significant in rural constituencies than urban areas.Figure 2.13: Did you attend any face-to-face voter education awareness sessions before the election? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)Overall, the most commonly cited medium for electoral awareness was the text message (just over half of all respondents), followed by radio (just under one third) and then newspapers (fewer than one in five) (see Figures 2.14-2.16).Figure 2.14: Have you received SIEC awareness via text messages? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)Figure 2.15: Have you received SIEC awareness via radio? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)Figure 2.16: Have you received SIEC awareness via newspapers? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)Use of social media/mobile phonesSurvey data also revealed interesting patterns about the use of social media and mobile phones during the election.  Overall, only one in ten of those surveyed had either received or shared information about the election on social media (Figure 2.17).  In Honiara, the figure was double this; the only other constituency to record a similar figure was Gizo Kolombangara.Figure 2.17: Have you shared or received information about the election on social media? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)A similar number of respondents, ie one in ten, said they had been contacted by phone by a candidate or candidate’s agent during the election campaign.  Again, the figure was roughly double this for the three Honiara constituencies (Figure 2.18). Figure 2.18: Has any candidate/agent contacted you by phone during the election? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)SecurityObservations by ANU’s team of 90 observers underlined that the campaign period was very largely free of violence and, in most cases, free of tension in the 15 constituencies covered.  Over two thirds of ANU observers described the law and order situation during the final week of campaigning as characterised by ‘few or no problems’, with just under a third noting ‘some tension but no election violence’ (Figure 2.19).  Figure 2.19: How would you describe the law and order situation during the campaign period? (All constituencies sampled)Only a handful of ANU observers reported witnessing election-related tension in the field, in the three constituencies of Central Honiara, North Vella Lavella and Gizo Kolombangara (Figure 2.20).  Figure 2.20: Did you observe any election related tension or violence during the campaign period? (By constituency)Perhaps not surprisingly, a considerably larger number of ANU observers (more than a third, and from a majority of constituencies where ANU observers were present) reported hearing about any election related tension in their respective constituencies (Figure 2.21).Figure 2.21: Did you hear about any election-related tension or violence during the campaign period? (All constituencies sampled)These observations can be compared with survey data in response to the question: In which election was intimidation greatest – 2019, 2014 or 2010? The responses to this question are shown in Figure 2.22.Figure 2.22: In which election was intimidation greatest? (All constituencies sampled)While such comparisons need to be treated carefully (and the large ‘Not sure’ category underlines this), this data doesn’t point to widespread perceptions of a decline in the security environment in which the 2019 NGE was conducted.Overall, the data amassed during the ANU observation exercise did not reveal any underlying or structural issues regarding the security environment in which the election took place. Nor did it identify any critical local situations. While this is encouraging, it cannot be assumed that this is necessarily the natural state of affairs for elections in Solomon Islands.2.3 Gender – women political candidatesA total of 26 women stood as candidates in 22 constituencies.  Responses to survey questions about women’s role in national politics therefore included a mixture of constituencies where women candidates were standing and where they were not.When asked whether there should be more women Members of Parliament, three-quarters of respondents said Yes (with a further ten per cent not sure, leaving a remainder of about one in eight saying No) (Figure 2.23). Yes responses ranged from 86 per cent in Central Honiara to 59 per cent in Gau Bugotu (where the ‘No’ response was also highest at 29 per cent).Figure 2.23: Do you think there should be more women MPs? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)There was very little separating men and women when responses to this question were disaggregated by gender (Figure 2.24).Figure 2.24: Do you think there should be more women MPs? (All constituencies sampled, by gender)When asked, however, whether they would, in fact, vote for a women candidate, only half of those surveyed said Yes (Figure 2.25).  Figure 2.25: Would you vote for a woman candidate? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)Again, very little separated men and women in response to this question (Figure 2.26), with men showing marginally stronger responses in both ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ categories (and therefore fewer ‘Not sure’ responses than women).Figure 2.26: Would you vote for a woman candidate? (All constituencies sampled, by gender)This suggests that Solomon Islanders – both women and men - are more comfortable with the idea of more women Members of Parliament in the abstract than they are in practice.2.4 Money politicsCitizens were surveyed during the campaign period about whether they had received any inducements (in either cash or kind) in return for their vote.  Only around one in twelve of those surveyed admitted to having received a gift in exchange for their vote, and less than half this number acknowledged having received cash.  There is, however, reason to believe that this result understates the role of money politics during the election campaign period.Those observers undertaking the surveys reported subsequently that citizens were generally aware of the laws governing electoral offenses and that many, while clearly reluctant to acknowledge having received inducements from candidates in a formal interview setting, were more prepared to do so informally at the conclusion of the interview.In this context it is notable that, in response to a more general question (Figure 2.27), one quarter of those surveyed said that candidates had made promises about providing support to them or their families in future.Figure 2.27: Did candidates make promises about providing support to you or your family in future? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)A similar proportion said they had heard reports of candidates or candidate agents handing over cash to obtain the support of voters in the constituency (Figure 2.28).Figure 2.28: Did you hear reports of any candidates or candidate agents handing over cash to obtain the support of voters? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)These last two data points may get us closer to an understanding of the role that money plays in (short-term) electoral campaigning in Solomon Islands, but it is difficult to be definitive on the basis of the data collected during this process2.  The absence of evidence about vote-buying is not necessarily evidence for its absence.  The subject is clearly a sensitive one in the minds of voters. This not to say that voters believe that they should not receive support from Members of Parliament; on the contrary.  As outlined above in discussing the reasons given by voters for changing their registration to new constituencies, many voters clearly believe that the delivery of benefits is the proper role of politicians.  But the data does suggest – if only tentatively – that voters are aware that direct cash-for-vote transactions during the campaign period do fall into the category of electoral offenses. In this sense, SIEO’s awareness campaign does seem to have had an impact in the minds of voters - even if it has not affected the underlying culture of clientelism which characterises Solomon Islands politics.In this connection it can be noted that, anecdotally at least, observers picked up very few reports about candidates moving round on “Devil’s Night” soliciting votes in exchange for gifts or cash (Figure 2.29).Figure 2.29: Did you hear about any candidates moving around on the night before the election soliciting votes? (All constituencies sampled and By constituency)Again, it is hard to draw definitive conclusions about this, but the relative absence of reports about Devil’s Night activities contrasts with previous elections and may point to the effectiveness of pre-campaign awareness activities, and of the ban on campaigning in the final 24 hours prior to polling day, which was a provision of the new Electoral Act.
4 – Voter experience and polling dayCitizens were able to cast votes in a relatively safe and peaceful manner at polling stations across the country on election day. Surveys with citizens before and after they voted show that in the large majority of cases, expectations of a free and fair election were generally met. A very high percentage of citizens were able to cast their vote, knew the polling station where they were registered to vote and were able to select a candidate in secret and free from intimidation. There were, however, widespread doubts over whether the winning candidate would be able to find out who individual citizens voted for after the election. In general, voters said that they preferred candidates that displayed strong leadership qualities and focused on looking after the communities they represented first. Broadly speaking, the election was well administered at polling stations with election officials adhering to proper procedures. This section begins by contrasting voter expectations with the reality of the voting experience. This is followed by citizen perspectives about the important factors that influenced their vote. Finally, assessments from observers on election day are detailed from when the polling station opened to when it was completed.4.1 Voter expectations and reality Citizen surveys were designed to make direct comparisons between expectations (pre-polling) and realities (post-polling) of the voter experience. Figure 4.1 shows data aggregated for all constituencies in relation to the expectations of voters before polling day. Almost all citizens (98 per cent) said that they intended to vote and a similar number (97 per cent) reported that they knew the polling station they needed to attend in order to cast their vote.3 The large majority of citizens (90 per cent) also expected to be able to vote freely without undue influence and about the same number thought that their vote would be kept secret at the time of voting.Figure 4.1: Citizen voting expectations (All constituencies)Voter experiences either met or exceeded voting expectations based on responses from citizens in the post polling period. These results reinforce the widely held view that voter turnout rates are high for elections in Solomon Islands. Figure 4.2 shows 98 per cent of citizens surveyed said that they voted at the election - the same figure as those who said they intended to vote. Less than 2 per cent of voters interviewed in the post polling surveys said they either did not try to vote, were prevented from doing so or were not on the register. The findings also confirm that most voters (96 per cent)  knew the polling station location for where they had to vote and were able to do so on polling day. Interestingly, a higher percentage of citizens surveyed believed that they were able to vote freely (94 vs 90 per cent) than they had expected. Similarly, more voters said that they were able to cast their vote in secret (96 per cent), which was higher than those who thought they would have a secret ballot (89 per cent) when interviewed prior to the election.  Figure 4.2: Citizen voting realities (All constituencies)While the large majority of voters believed they had a secret ballot on polling day, opinions were split on whether the winning candidate would be able to find out who they voted for after the election. Figure 4.3 shows aggregated results for all constituencies to the question put to citizens: Do you think the winning candidate will be able to find out afterwards who you voted for? Close to an even third of respondents answered either ‘yes’, ‘no’ or ‘not sure’ to this question. Figure 4.3: Winning candidate will find out who citizens voted for (All constituencies)There was significant variation in results across constituencies regarding whether or not citizens thought that candidates would be able to find out who they had voted for.  Figure 4.4 shows that close to half of citizens surveyed in North Vella La Vella, Gizo Kolumbangara and Lau Mbaelelea thought the eventual MP would find out, which was much less than North West Choiseul (13 per cent) and East Guadalcanal (14 per cent). Anecdotal evidence that might explain the range of responses across constituencies centred around awareness of the current system. For example, observers in Lau Mbaelelea remarked that citizens thought that their voter ID numbers would be written on ballot papers, which was widely believed to have occurred in the 2014 election. In Gizo Kolumbangara, however, observers said that, ‘some people wanted candidates to know who they voted for – they wanted to give candidates proof that they voted for them. One observer even described an incident where a voter attempted to photograph their completed ballot paper but was stopped by electoral officials. While this question examined the electoral processes that ensure a secret ballot, many citizens were also quick to add that while candidates may not have proof, they were still likely to assume who individuals, families and entire communities had voted for.    Figure 4.4: Winning candidate will find out who citizens voted for (By constituency)Prior to the election, most citizens interviewed (more than 70 per cent) believed that they required their voter ID card to cast their vote. See Figure 4.5. While voter ID cards can help polling officials to identify eligible voters on the register of electors, they are not a requirement for voting. There was some variation in this finding across constituencies with Central and East Honiara, and, perhaps surprisingly, the rural constituency of North West Choiseul, where a higher proportion of voters knew that voter ID cards were not a requirement for voting (Figure 4.6).These results suggest that voters may have expected to be turned away from polling stations if they were unable to present their voter ID cards. Our observation data collected on election day clearly shows that this was not the case. Based on a total of 146 observations of polling stations, there were only four recorded instances where observers noted that voters were unable to cast their ballot because they did not have their voter ID cards with them. While electoral officials were generally well informed that voter ID cards were not mandatory, they were commonly used by voters and officials on polling day to speed up the process of finding voters’ names on the roll.    Figure 4.5: Voter ID card is required to vote (All)Figure 4.6: Voter ID card is required to vote (All constituencies)4.2 Factors that influence voter behaviour Citizen surveys asked a series of questions about how voters choose preferred candidates to represent their constituency. This section highlights some of the key factors that influence voter decision making. Figure 4.7 shows that more than 80 per cent of voters across all constituencies sampled responded that they themselves had the most influence over their vote A further 16 per cent said that their family was the most significant factor in deciding how they voted, while fewer than 2 per cent of those surveyed said someone else in their community influenced their vote.  Figure 4.7: Most influence in deciding on how to vote (All constituencies)There was significant variation in results across constituencies ranging from 92 per cent of voters in North West Choiseul identifying themselves as having the most influence over their voting behaviour compared to 61 per cent in East Honiara. Our observers, who administered these citizen surveys, were somewhat sceptical about the high percentage of voters who believed they had the most influence over their vote. They suggested that family ties may have a greater bearing on the way citizens decide on who to vote for than the results suggest. One observer summarised a commonly held view in stating that “they (voters) will say I made my own decision but, in reality, we know about the power of family ties. If you don’t vote for someone the whole family turns against you. Sometimes they think that they make their own decision but they are really influenced by others”.Figure 4.7: Most influence in deciding on how to vote (By constituency)For respondents who claimed that they themselves had the most influence over who they voted for, a further question was asked about the most important factors that determined how they voted. Figure 4.8 shows that by far the most commonly cited response was the character of the candidate (65 per cent). Only a third of respondents said that the policies and promises offered by individual candidates were important factors that influenced their vote. To a lesser extent, citizens mentioned that community and personal obligations impacted on their decision making, while 16 per cent cited the importance of kinship links with candidates. Only 2 per cent of citizens said that fear influenced their vote.  Figure 4.8: Most important factors that influenced voting (All constituencies)Figure 4.9 makes comparisons across constituencies in regards to the percentage of citizens who stated that the ‘character of the candidate’ was an important factor influencing their vote. It is clear that citizens hold contrasting perspectives in different constituencies. For instance, almost 90 per cent of voters in Central Guadalcanal and Aoke Langalanga cited the character of the candidate as a significant factor that impacted how they voted compared to 45 per cent in Maringe Kokota. Figure 4.9: Most important factors that influenced voting – Character of candidate (By constituency)Voters who stated that the policies and promises of candidates was important in deciding on how they voted provides an interesting contrast when results are viewed by constituency. Less than 20 per cent of citizens in Small Malaita, North Vella Lavella and Central Makira (generally considered to be more rural constituencies) cited policies and promises as an important factor compared to more than two-thirds in East Honiara, which was double the average for all constituencies.Figure 4.9: Most important factors that influenced voting – Policies and promises of candidates (By constituency)A related question asked of voters in post polling surveys was about the most important qualities they want in a candidate. Figure 4.10 shows that the two most common responses were ‘accessible to the community’ (51 per cent) and ‘looks after the community’ (46 per cent). These results add weight to the commonly held perspective that citizens vote for candidates who focus on providing material benefits to communities as opposed to representing them in the national parliament. Indeed, only 24 per cent of respondents stated that ‘good policies’ was an important quality they wanted in a candidate. As one citizen from Maringe Kokota put it, ‘we do not care when politicians talk about national policies and budgets. That is not our problem. Our concern is how you will share that money with our community’.  Similar to the factors that influence voting behaviour (previously described in Figure 4.8), these results suggest that the candidate’s perceived character is important to voters. 40 per cent of citizens surveyed stated that being a ‘strong leader’ and possessing ‘strong personal/moral qualities’ (34 per cent) were attributes they wanted to see in a candidate. Only 7 per cent of citizens surveyed said that political party affiliation was an important factor.        Figure 4.10: Most important qualities voters want in candidate (All constituencies)Figure 4.11 shows that candidate accessibility to the community was consistently cited as an important quality in most consistencies sampled. In only two constituencies, Small Malaita and West Honiara, about 20 per cent of respondents identified accessibility as an important quality, much lower than the aggregated average for all constituencies which was over 50 per cent. In contrast, there was a wider range of responses in citizens stating that ‘good policies’ was an important quality they wanted in candidates across constituencies. Figure 4.12 shows that more than half of surveyed citizens in East Honiara and Aoke Langalanga identified ‘good policies’ as important compared to less than 10 per cent in Central Makira, Small Malaita and West Honiara. Figure 4.11: Most important qualities voters want in candidate – Accessible to the communityFigure 4.12: Most important qualities voters want in candidate – Good policies4.3 Polling day administrationObservers witnessed the conduct of the election on polling day by making assessments against pre-determined questions contained in their journals. The results reported in this section relate to the administration of the election from the set-up of the polling station to identifying voters on the register, the actual process of voting, security and the closure of the polling station.According to the Electoral Act, polling on election day was supposed to start promptly at 7am and close at 5pm, or until the last voter in line has voted Figure 4.13 shows, however, that voting only commenced on time at  less than half of polling stations attended by observers. There was significant variation between constituencies ranging from 100 per cent compliance in Aoke Langalanga to 29 per cent in Small Malaita and Russell Savo (Figure 4.14). Both rural and urban constituencies experienced delays in the opening of polling stations, which implies that the geographical location did not appear to be a major factor, despite voting taking place in rural and remote locations across Solomon Islands. While almost all polling booths visited on election day closed at 5pm (89 per cent), observers heard that electoral officials at one location had planned on closing an hour early because there were very few names left on the roll by the afternoon.   Figure 4.7: Polling station opened on time (All constituencies) Figure 4.14: Polling station opened on time (By constituency)There was significant variation across constituencies as to whether polling stations were set up to accommodate the needs of those with disabilities. Overall, less than half of observers believed that the polling station could provide for such needs. Figure 4.15 shows a clear lack of consistency in how polling stations were set up. In general, rural constituencies appeared to be better able to support voters with disabilities. For instance, in East Guadalcanal and Gao Bagatu, observers noted that all polling stations attended could accommodate voters with disability or impaired mobility compared to only 20 per cent in Aoke Langalanga. In Central and West Honiara, less than half of the polling stations attended were set up to support those with disabilities. The most common accessibility complaint recorded by observers was that voters had to climb stairs to reach polling booths.  Figure 4.15: Polling station accommodates needs of those with disabilities Observation data collected indicates that voting compartments were positioned to screen the voter from view to ensure a secret ballot. This occurred in almost 90 per cent of cases when figures are aggregated for all constituencies sampled. The only constituency where half of our observers believed that voters did not have a secret ballot due to the set up of the polling station was West Honiara (Figure 4.16). Figure 4.16: Compartments positioned to screen voters from observation  Other important aspects of polling station administration appeared to be broadly complied with across constituencies sampled. The list of candidates was clearly displayed at polling stations, and ballot boxes were  exhibited empty prior to polling commencing and then securely fastened at the close of polling. Across all polling stations observed, three quarters of our observers noted that candidates were not present at the polling station. In almost all cases (over 92 per cent) observers were confident that candidates and campaign managers did not attempt to interfere or influence voters in any way. In regards to identifying voters at observed polling stations on election day, 28 per cent of our observers noted that polling assistants had difficulty locating names on the Register of Electors. Figure 4.17 shows that locating names was more difficult in particular constituencies, especially Russell Savo, Small Malaita and West Honiara.Figure 4.17: Polling assistants had difficulty locating names on register  In roughly equal proportions, observers noted that both women and men were turned away because their names could not be found on the Register of Electors. See Figure 4.18 and 4.19. There were, however, very few instances noted of voters turned away because they did not have their voter ID cards or they looked different to their photos. Most of these incidences appeared to be related to confusion or mistakes made during the registration process, although observers did note one instance where a chief was allegedly turning away groups of people who were wanting to vote. There also appeared to be some confusion amongst voters when the location of the polling station had changed with little notice. Figure 4.18: Women turned away because names could not be found on registerFigure 4.19: Men turned away because names could not be found on registerIn almost all cases indelible ink was appropriately used and applied to each and every voter at polling stations observed. In addition, it was noted that polling assistants checked all voters’ fingers before they were permitted to vote. As a result, there were very few instances where multiple voting was observed. There was, however, more noted instances of underage voting.  Figure 4.20 shows that in some constituencies, particularly Gao Bugotu and Lau Mbaelelea underage voting was more common. Figure 4.20: Observed instances of underage votingGenerally, our observers did not record more blatant electoral offences. This includes obtaining a ballot paper to vote on behalf of another person or attempting to intimidate or exercise undue influence over voters at the polling station. There was virtually no evidence of gifting/treating to secure votes or overt bias towards a particular candidate on the part of the police or polling officials. Some of the very minor disturbances that were noted related to the conduct of voters or candidate agents such as one instance where a voter asked the presiding officer to see another voter’s ballot paper, or another case where candidates’ agents were allowed by the presiding officer to sit very close to the area where electoral officials were administering ballot papers.    Overall, the large majority of observers (over 80 per cent) believed that there were no violations in the conduct of voting at polling stations. In some constituencies, however, some minor violations were noted, particularly in Lau Mbaelelea, and to a lesser extent in Maringe Kokota and North Vella Lavella (Figure 4.21).Figure 4.21: Overall assessment of voter conduct at polling stations For most constituencies, observers noted that people wanting the opportunity to vote were able to do so with the exception of a few constituencies, mainly Gizo Kolumbangara. At the close of polling all observers noted that the ballot-box was sealed in the presence of polling assistants and polling agents. In addition, over 90 per cent of observers believed that polling agents managed the polling station well and had a good understanding of their roles. Observers also said that communication between the electoral officials and security personnel was effective. Almost all observers said that they were able to freely observe without interference and there were very few instances where observers felt unsafe in making their observations. 
5 – After the election (post-polling) The After the Election section of this report draws on observational data from the observers who participated in the ANU’s election observation mission. It provides an initial but rich analysis of the data collected by drawing on the observers’ individual assessments. Generally speaking the post-polling period of the 2019 Solomon Islands NGE ran smoothly.  People felt safe to move around post-election, the count incorporated new accountability measures so that peoples’ votes remained secret and key electoral personnel had a solid grasp on their roles.  The election was not without issues. Observers reported on delays with the transportation of ballot boxes, perceived biasness of electoral personnel and transparency issues with the count.  This section of the report provides an initial assessment of the post-polling period including the transportation of ballot papers, key electoral personnel, and an assessment of inclusion and security matters. It then focuses on the counting process and procedures before outlining the reported disputes raised during the counting period. 5.1 Assessments of the post-polling periodGenerally our observers found that the post-polling period ran smoothly without occurrence of any major issues. While there are a few notable points of interest that our observers recorded there was an election-related death in another part of the country that was not reported by our observers.  Throughout this period observers were asked to provide their views on the transportation of the ballot boxes, the performance of key electoral personnel, the inclusion of people with disabilities and the elderly, and on the security situation.  Transportation of ballot boxesPrior to the transportation of ballot papers, almost all of our observers recorded that the Presiding Officers at their respective polling stations completed the correct process to account for the unused, spoilt and tendered ballot papers.  An even larger proportion of our observers found that the ballot boxes were well secured up until they were transported to the provincial centres for counting indicating that the polling agents and security staff were able to implement SIEC procedures.  It was during the transportation of the ballot boxes following the close of polling day that our observers felt that there were some, mainly unavoidable, changes to the process.  The observational data provided in Figure 5.1 shows that over 30 per cent of our observers - mostly in the East Guadalcanal, Small Malaita, Aoke/Langa Langa and Central Makira constituencies - observed that the ballot boxes were not directly transported to the counting centres.  This can be explained by issues with and delays to the methods of transport or concerns around. Observers noted that in some instances only one mode of transport was allocated to the collection of ballot boxes which meant that ballot boxes were at polling stations longer than anticipated prior to being moved.  Figure 5.1 Transportation of ballot boxes to counting centres (all constituencies)The majority of observers believed that there were not any attempts to interfere with the ballot boxes from the close of polling day to the time of the count.  There were general concerns around the security of the ballot boxes prior to the count in Aoke/Langa Langa. While the ballot boxes were stored at the Auki Police Headquarters prior to count, observers heard that there was some discontent amongst the public around the counting venue itself. Prior to the count there was a general feeling amongst the public that security of the ballot boxes at the counting venue was in question. One observer noted that ‘the ballot box should be inspected in a more neutral location because the hotel owner has an association with the MP’.  Assessment of key personnelThe majority of observers found that the electoral personnel did a solid job on Election Day based on a good understanding of their role however observers did raise concerns around the impartiality of polling officials.  Around 60 per cent of ANU’s observers were of the opinion that the Returning Officers, Presiding Officers and Polling Assistants seemed to be unbiased and impartial a number of observers in each constituency (besides Russell Savo) raised concerns about the impartiality of these polling officials. As an example, figure 5.2 provides a constituency breakdown of this data for the Presiding Officer.  It shows that the majority of concerns regarding impartiality Presiding Officers were from observers placed in Central Makira, East Honiara and Lau Mbaelelea. Observers were of the opinion that there is a potential for bias behaviour from polling officials if they are placed in the constituencies they were from. Figure 5.2 Was the PO unbiased and impartial (by constituency) 	Generally, the majority of observers across our targeted constituencies thought that the Presiding Officers and Polling Assistants had a good understanding of their role. Observers were almost all in agreement that Presiding Officers were able to stay in control of the polling stations with only a small number noting that they were only ‘sometimes’ in control.  Observers who answered ‘sometimes’ stated that when the Presiding Officer wasn’t in control of the polling station, another polling official took charge. In one case, an observer noted that ‘in my observations the PO and PAs shared equal responsibilities by ensuring every voters has the chances to vote, while keeping the exercise run smoothly’. Overall this data gives a good indication that there was a sense of ownership of the polling stations by the polling officials. Assessment of inclusionThe initial assessment of the data indicates that while people with physical disabilities and the elderly and frail were able to cast their votes, there were a number of issues around accessibility of venues and wait times that made voting challenging for these voters. Observers noted that in the majority of cases, priority access was given to people with disabilities and the elderly and frail however this data varied across the constituencies. Highlighting the issue around the appropriate selection of polling stations that are easily accessible to all voters, a large majority of observers noted that people with disabilities required assistance to access the polling station. Once in the polling station, almost all people with disabilities and the elderly and frail who voted, needed assistance to do so with only a minority of assistance being forced.   Assessment of securityThe majority of observers reported that during the post-polling period it was generally peaceful and safe for local people to move around, with minimal incidents of violence being reported.  While not witnessed by our observers, there were news reports of an election-related death during the post-polling period. Generally observers themselves felt safe following the close of polls with only just over 17 per cent reporting minor incidents of violence (see Figure 5.3).  The type of minor post-election violence that was reported by our observers was generally confined to supporters swearing and arguing with opposing supporters.  There were other cases that were more serious.  Observers in Aoke/Langa Langa reported that youths burnt a leaf hut and in Gizo/Kolombangara a group of winning candidates supporters’ reclaimed a RCDF-funded outboard motor from a former MPs supporters.Figure 5.3 Incidents of minor post-election violence (all constituencies)An observer in Central Honiara reported that there were incidents of road blocks, domestic violence, shooting and looting post-election.   As reported in the Solomon Star newspaper4, in Malaita province two male supporters of opposing candidates were involved in an election-related argument resulting in the drowning death of one of them. 5.2 - Counting periodCounting for the 2019 National General Elections mostly ran well although for some counting centres it was a slow process. There were two main changes to counting that were implemented for this election.  These were shifting of the count to provincial centres and the batch counting of ballot boxes.  While both were significantly positive procedures, they also contributed to the slow counting process. Throughout the counting period, observers were asked to record general observations on the overall process of the count, counting officials, standards of the counting venues and security of the ballot boxes.  Counting processObservers reported that the counting for most constituencies commenced as scheduled the day after the election.   In a small number of constituencies in which ANU observed, the count took a few extra days to begin.  The delay was partially associated with the amount of time it took to collect the ballot boxes from within the constituencies before they were all moved together to the provincial centres.  Observers recorded that the counting for majority of the constituencies extended past the one day count (see Figure 5.4).  In some cases, for example for West Honiara constituency, the count took up to five days.  In the circumstances where the count was prolonged, our observers overall agreed that ballot boxes were adequately secured overnight and counting venues were adequately lit.  Figure 5.4 Was the count completed in one day (all constituencies)An initial assessment for this delay is that the new counting system slowed the process of the count down considerably more than expected. All ballot papers from three to four randomly assigned ballot boxes were counted in one large batch. The reasoning for this was to give voters confidence that they votes would remain secret.  While useful, this new accountability mechanism slowed the process of the count.   With the stark exception of observers in Maringe-Kokota (see figure 5.5), almost all observers noted due process was followed by the Returning Officers when accounting for all ballot papers, unused and spoilt paper and the tendered vote list.  If there were any irregularities of the account of ballots, the responsible Presiding Officer was called into the counting centre to provide a justification for any anomalies. Figure 5.5 Accounting of ballots by RO (by constituencies)In instances where there were questions around the validity of ballot papers, a large per cent of polling officials insured that the papers where available to be properly scrutinised by candidates agents and observers. As you will see in Figure 5.6 there were reported cases in Maringe-Kokota, Central Makira and North Vella of officials either not displaying papers for scrutiny or else only sometimes. One observer noted that she ‘observed approx 10% of ballot papers being dsplayed for scrutiny. i dont think this was due to any malfeasance, though the count wasnt particularly transparent’.Figure 5.6 Determining validity of votes (by constituencies)End of countingA large per cent of observers confirmed that the Returning Officer followed procedure and sealed in separate packets any ballot papers that were rejected. Some observers noted that they were not sure if the procedure had been done and observers in Maringe-Kokota categorically said that this process had not been followed (see Figure 5.7).  Figure 5.7 Sealing of counted and rejected ballot papers (by constituencies)As reported by our observers, in the majority of cases election results were declared as soon as practicable possible after the count.  In a majority of cases, observers reported that results were progressively reported back to SIEC headquarters in Honiara, however it was not clear to all observers that this process was being followed. Overall, the reported level of security at the counting centres was high.  Almost all observers reported that there was a security presence at the venues however there were some issues around the protocols.  In some counting centres observers, candidates’ agents and security had access to and were able to use mobile phones.  One observer noted that ‘on the first day they [the police] allowed mobile phones in counting and people were communicating results’.  In other counting centres mobile phones were either confiscated or had to be switched off. The variation of mobile phone protocol seemed to be at the discretion of RO and security. Counting assessmentObservers generally agreed that the count was conducted in an open and transparent manner (see figure 5.8).  Some did note general transparency issues such as the speed in which the count was conducted in some venues resulting in mistakes and ballots not being displayed for validity. An observer in Aoke/Langa Langa noted that when officials picked up a mistake no declaration was made to the audience but instead ‘quietly corrected mistakes’. Figure 5.8 Transparency of count (all constituencies)An initial assessment of the data collected by our observers shows that there were no reported cases of discrepancies between the number of ballots issued to polling stations and the returned ballots.  Observational reports from our observers show that generally candidate and counting agents did not have an influence over nor disrupted the counting process, although there were a small number of cases that this was not the case (see Figure ** in annex).  In particular, observers in Aoke/Langa Langa, East Honiara, Central Guadalcanal and West Honiara all noted that there were incidents where counting was influenced or disrupted by the agents. In West Honiara, counting agents were dissatisfied with the level of transparency of the counting process and requested that, for better accountability, each individual ballot paper should be displayed. There were reported cases by observers on the count being suspended by interjections from candidate agents. The count in West Honiara was stopped when agents complained about the process of pre-polling ballots being included in one of the polling day batches. Agents wanted pre-polling ballots to be counted separately because agents were not present during the pre-polling and could not account for their legitimacy. Counting was halted until the following day until the Electoral Manager had a chance to seek advice from SIEC.  Figure 5.9 Candidates/Counting agents influencing the count (all constituencies)5.3 – DisputesThe data collected by our observers on disputes relates only to counting during the post-polling period and does not take into account other formal disputes made since. In particular observers were asked to record details on disputes made in relation to particular ballot boxes and whether the candidate made any early indications of formally disputing the results.On the question on if there were any formal disputes raised in relation to particular ballot boxes during the count, the majority of observers noted that there were not.  An observer in the East Honiara count noted that a candidate’s agent left the venue after making a formal complaint due.  The agent disputed the validity of a ballot box as the responsible Presiding Officer neglected to record the seal numbers for the ballot box. The agent was quoted saying that ‘these presiding officer were senior public officers they should know what they were supposed to do’. Figure 5.9 shows that in four constituencies, observers noted that a candidate indicated that they would be lodging a formal challenge to the official election results.  Observers recorded that the reasons for the challenges were allegations of bribery, vote buying, misappropriation of RCDF and concerns around the entire electoral process.  Figure 5.10 Formal court challenge by candidate (by constituencies)Needs a summary paragraph……………………1 Data was also collected about the role played by Constituency Development Funds in voter expectations and behaviour.  This data will be discussed in a subsequent, longer report, and should add considerable depth to the discussion of “money politics” in Solomon Islands by shifting the focus from the immediate campaign period to a longer political cycle. 2 The citizen surveys also collected data on the role of, and attitudes towards, Constituency Development Funds (CDFs) in politics which provides a broader, and longer-term, picture of the interplay between the expectations of citizens and the behaviour of politicians.  This data will be analysed in detail in the forthcoming Final Report.3 In Solomon Islands, registered voters are only able to cast their vote at one polling station located in the constituency in which they are registered.  4 https://www.solomonstarnews.com/index.php/news/national/item/21500-police-probe-election-related-death-in-malaita--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------19